Heidi men call me when their homes I visit,
A far seeing Volva, wise in talismans.
Caster of spells, cunning in magic.
To wicked women welcome always.

Arm rings and necklaces, Odhinn you gave me
To learn my lore, to learn my magic:
Wider and wider through all worlds I see.

Outside I sat by myself when you came,
Terror of the gods, and gazed in my eyes.
What do you ask of me? Why tempt me?
Odhinn, I know where your eye is concealed,
Hidden away in the well of Mimir:
Mimir each morning his mead drinks
From Valfather's pledge. Well would you know more?

Of Heimdal too and his horn I know.
Hidden under the holy tree
Down on it pours a precious stream from Valfather's pledge
Well would you know more?

Silence I ask of the sacred folk,
Silence of the kith and kin of Heimdal:
At your will Valfather, I shall well relate
The old songs of men I remember best.

I tell of giants from times forgotten.
Those who fed me in former days:
Nine worlds I can reckon, nine roots of the tree.
The wonderful ash, way under the ground.

When Ymir lived long ago
Was no sand or sea, no surging waves.
Nowhere was there earth nor heaven above.
Bur a grinning gap and grass nowhere.

The sons of Bur then built up the lands.
Moulded in magnificence middle-Earth:
Sun stared from the south on the stones of their hall,
From the ground there sprouted green leeks.

Sun turned from the south, sister of Moon,
Her right arm rested on the rim of Heaven;
She had no inkling where her hall was,
Nor Moon a notion of what might he had,
The planets knew not where their places were.

The high gods gathered in council
In their hall of judgement. all the rulers:
To Night and to Nightfall their names gave,
The Morning they named and the Mid-Day,
Mid-Winter, Mid-Summer, for the assigning of years.

At Ida's Field the Aesir met:
Temple and altar they timbered and raised,
Set up a forge to smithy treasures,
Tongs they fashioned and tools wrought;

Played chess in the court and cheerful were;
Gold they lacked not, the gleaming metal
Then came three, the Thurs maidens,
Rejoicing in their strength, from Giant-home.

The high Gods gathered in council,
In their hall of judgement: Who of the dwarves
Should mould man by master craft
From Brimir's blood and Blain's limbs?

Motsognir was their mighty ruler,
Greatest of dwarves, and Durin after him:
The dwarves did as Durin directed,
Many man forms made from the earth.

Nyi and Nidi, Nordri, Sudri, Austri and Vestri, Althjof, Dvalin, Bivor,
Bavor Bombur, Nori, An and Anar, Ai, Mjodvitnir, Veignr and Gandalf, 
Vindalf, Thorin, Thror and Thrain, Thekkur, Litur, Vitur, Nar and Nyradur,
Fili, Kili, Fundin, Nali Hefti, Vili, Hanar, Sviur, Billing, Bruni, Bildur,
and Buri, Frar, Hornbori Fraegur, Loni, Aurvangur, Jari, Eikinskjaldi: 
All Durin's folk I have duly named.

I must tell of the dwarves in Dvalin's host;
Like lions they were in Lofar's time:
In Juravale's marsh they made their dwelling,
From their Stone hall set out on journeys.

There was Draupnir and Dolgthrasir, Har, Haugspori, Hlevangur, Gloi, Dori,
Ori, Dufur, Andvari, Skirvir, Virvir Skafidur, Ai, Alf and Yngvi, 
Eikinskjaldi, Fjalar and Frosti, Finn and Ginnar: Men will remember while
men live
The long line of Lofar's forbears.

Then from the host three came,
Great, merciful, from the God's home:
Ash and Elm on earth they found,
Faint, feeble, with no fate assigned them.

Breath they had not, nor blood nor senses,
Nor language possessed, nor life-hue:
Odhinn gave them breath, Haenir senses,
Blood and life hue Lothur gave.

I know an ash tree, named Yggdrasil:
Sparkling showers are shed on its leaves
That drip dew, into the dales below,
By Urd's well it waves evergreen,
Stands over that still pool,
Near it a bower whence now there come
The Fate Maidens, first Urd,
Then Verdandi, the second
Skuld, third of the Norns: scorer of runes,
The laws that determine the lives of men
They fixed forever and their fate sealed.

The first war in the world I well remember,
When Gullveig was spitted on spear-points
And burned in the hall of the high god:
Thrice burned, thrice reborn,
Often laid low, she lives yet.

The gods hastened to their hall of judgement,
Sat in council to discover who
Had tainted all the air with corruption
And Odhinn's maid offered to the giants.

At the host Odhinn hurled his spear
In the first world-battle; broken was the plankwall
Of the gods fortress: the fierce Vanes
Caused war to occur in the fields.

The gods hastened to their hall of judgement,
Sat in council to discover who
Had tainted all the air with corruption
And Odhinn's maid offered to the giants.

One Thorr felled in his fierce rage;
Seldom he sits when of such he hears:
Oaths were broken, binding vows,
Solemn agreements sworn between them.

Valkyries I saw, coming from afar,
Eagerly riding to aid the Goths;
Skuld bore one shield, Skogul another
Gunn, Hild, Gondul and Spearskogul:
Duly have I named the daughters of Odhinn,
The valiant riders the Valkyries.

Baldur I saw the bleeding God,
His fate still hidden, Odhinn's Son:
Tall on the plain a plant grew,
A slender marvel, the mistletoe.

From that fair shrub, shot by Hodur,
Flew the fatal dart that felled the god,
But Baldur's brother was born soon after:
Though one night old, Odhinn's Son
Took a vow to avenge that death.

His hands he washed not nor his hair combed.
Till Baldur's bane was borne to the pyre:
Deadly the bow drawn by Vali,
The strong string of stretched gut,
But Frigga wept in Fensalir
For the woe of Valhalla. Well, would you know more?

I see one in bonds by the boiling springs;
Like Loki he looks, loathsome to view:
There Sigyn sits, sad by her husband,
In woe by her man. Well would you know more?

From the east through Venom Valley runs
Over jagged rocks the River Gruesome.

North, in Darkdale, stands the dwelling place
Of Sindri's kin, covered with gold;
A hall also in Everfrost,
The banquet hall of Brimir the giant.

A third I see, that no sunlight reaches,
On Dead Man's Shore: the doors face northward,
Through its smoke vent venom drips,
Serpent skins enskein that hall.

Men wade there tormented by the stream,
Vile murderers, men forsworn
And artful seducers of other mens wives:
Nidhogg sucks blood from the bodies of the dead
The wolf rends them. Well, would you know more?

In the east dwells a crone, in Ironwood:
The brood of Fenris are bred there
Wolf-monsters, one of whom
Eventually shall devour the sun.

The giants watchman, joyful Eggthur
Sits on his howe and harps well:
The red cock, called All-Knower
Boldly crows from Birdwood.

Goldencomb to the gods crows
Who wakes the warriors in Valhalla:
A soot red hen also calls
From Hel's hall, deep under the ground.

Loud howls Garm before Gnipahellir,
Bursting his fetters, Fenris runs:
Further in the future afar I behold
The twilight of the gods who gave victory.

Brother shall strike brother and both fall,
Sisters sons defiled with incest;
Evil be on earth, an age of whoredom,
Of sharp sword-play and shields clashing,
A wind-age, a wolf-age till the world ruins:
No man to another shall mercy show.

The waters are troubled, the waves surge up:
Announcing now the knell of Fate,
Heimdal winds his horn aloft,
On Hel's road all men tremble.

Yggdrasil trembles, the towering ash
Groans in woe; the wolf is loose:
Odhinn speaks with the head of Mimir
Before he is swallowed by Surt's kin.

From the east drives Hrym, lifts up his shield
The squamous serpent squirms with rage
The great worm with the waves contending
The pale-beaked eagle pecks at the dead,
Shouting for joy: the ship Naglfar.

Sails out from the east, at its helm Loki
With the children of darkness, the doom-bringers
Offspring of monsters, allies of the wolf,
All who Byleists's brother follow.

What of the gods? What of the elves?
Gianthome groans the gods are in council
The dwarves grieve before their door of stone,
Masters of walls. Well, would you know more?

Surt with the bane of branches comes
From the south, on his sword the sun of the Valgods,
Crags topple, the crone falls headlong,
Men tread Hel's road, the Heavens split open.

A further woe falls upon Hlin
As Odhinn comes forth to fight the wolf;
The killer of Beli battles with Surt:
Now shall fall Frigga's beloved.

Now valiant comes Valfather's son,
Vidar, to vie with Valdyr in battle,
Plunges his sword into he son of Hvedrung,
Avenging his father with a fell thrust.

Now the son of Hlodyn and Odhinn comes
To fight with Fenris; fiercest of warriors
He mauls in his rage all Middle-Earth;
Men in fear all flee their homesteads;
Nine paces back steps Bur's son
Retreats from the worm of taunts unafraid.

Now death is the portion of doomed men,
Red with blood the buildings of gods,
The sun turns black in the summer after,
Winds whine. Well, would know more?

Earth sinks in the sea, the sun turns black,
Cast down from Heaven are the hot stars,
Fumes reek, into flames burst,
The sky itself is scorched with fire.

I see Earth rising a second time
Out of the foam, fair and green;
Down from the fells fish to capture,
Wings the eagle; waters flow.

At lda's Field the Aesir meet:
They remember the worm of Middle-Earth,
Ponder again the great twilight
And the ancient runes of the high god.

Boards shall be found of a beauty to wonder at,
Boards of gold in the grass long after,
The chess boards they owned in the olden days.

Unsown acres shall harvests bear,
Evil be abolished, Baldur return
And Hropt's hall with Hod rebuild,
Wise gods. Well, would you know more?

Haenir shall wield the wand of prophecy,
The sons two brothers set up their dwelling
In wide Windhome. Well, would you know more?

Fairer than sunlight, I see a hall
A hall thatched with gold in Gimle:
Kind Lords shall live there in delight for ever.

Now rides the Strong One to Rainbow Door,
Powerful from heaven, the All-Ruler:
From the depths below a drake comes flying
The dark dragon from Darkfell,
Bears on his pinions the bodies of men,
Soars overhead I sink now.



The man who stands at a strange threshold, 
Should be cautious before he cross it, 
Glance this way and that:
Who knows beforehand what foes may sit 
Awaiting him in the hall?

Greetings to the host, 
The guest has arrived, 
In which seat shall he sit?
Rash is he who at unknown doors 
Relies on his good luck. 

Fire is needed by the newcomer 
Whose knees are frozen numb;
Meat and clean linen a man needs 
Who has fared across the fells. 

Water, too, that he may wash before eating, 
Handcloth's and a hearty welcome, 
Courteous words, then courteous silence 
That he may tell his tale. 

Who travels widely needs his wits about him, 
The stupid should stay at home:
The ignorant man is often laughed at 
When he sits at meat with the sage. 

Of his knowledge a man should never boast, 
Rather be sparing of speech 
When to his house a wiser comes:
Seldom do those who are silent Make mistakes; 
mother wit Is ever a faithful friend. 

A guest should be courteous 
When he comes to the table
And sit in wary silence, 
His ears attentive, 
his eyes alert:
So he protects himself. 

Fortunate is he who is favored in his lifetime 
With praise and words of wisdom:
Evil counsel is often given 
By those of evil heart. 

Blessed is he who in his own lifetime 
Is awarded praise and wit, 
For ill counsel is often given 
By mortal men to each other. 

Better gear than good sense 
A traveler cannot carry, 
Better than riches for a wretched man, 
Far from his own home. 

Better gear than good sense 
A traveler cannot carry. 
A more tedious burden than too much drink 
A traveler cannot carry. 

Less good than belief would have it 
Is mead for the sons of men:
A man knows less the more he drinks, 
Becomes a befuddled fool. 

I forget is the name men give the heron 
Who hovers over the feast:
Fettered I was in his feathers that night, 
When a guest in Gunnlod's court.

Drunk I got, dead drunk, 
When Fjalar the wise was with me:
Best is the banquet one looks back on after, 
And remembers all that happened. 

Silence becomes the Son of a prince, 
To be silent but brave in battle:
It befits a man to be merry and glad 
Until the day of his death. 

The coward believes he will live forever 
If he holds back in the battle, 
But in old age he shall have no peace 
Though spears have spared his limbs 

When he meets friends, the fool gapes, 
Is shy and sheepish at first, 
Then he sips his mead and immediately 
All know what an oaf he is.

He who has seen and suffered much, 
And knows the ways of the world, 
Who has traveled', can tell what spirit 
Governs the men he meets.

Drink your mead, but in moderation, 
Talk sense or be silent:
No man is called discourteous who goes 
To bed at an early hour.

A gluttonous man who guzzles away 
Brings sorrow on himself:
At the table of the wise he is taunted often, 
Mocked for his bloated belly. 

The herd knows its homing time, 
And leaves the grazing ground:
But the glutton never knows how much 
His belly is able to hold. 

An ill tempered, unhappy man 
Ridicules all he hears, 
Makes fun of others, refusing always 
To see the faults in himself. 

Foolish is he who frets at night, 
And lies awake to worry
A weary man when morning comes, 
He finds all as bad as before. 

The fool thinks that those who laugh 
At him are all his friends, 
Unaware when he sits with wiser men 
How ill they speak of him. 

The fool thinks that those who laugh 
At him are all his friends:
When he comes to the Thing and calls for support,
Few spokesmen he finds.

The fool who fancies he is full of wisdom 
While he sits by his hearth at home.
Quickly finds when questioned by others . 
That he knows nothing at all. 

The ignorant booby had best be silent 
When he moves among other men, 
No one will know what a nit-wit he is 
Until he begins to talk;
No one knows less what a nit-wit he is 
Than the man who talks too much. 

To ask well, to answer rightly, 
Are the marks of a wise man:
Men must speak of men's deeds, 
What happens may not be hidden. 

Wise is he not who is never silent, 
Mouthing meaningless words:
A glib tongue that goes on chattering 
Sings to its own harm. 

A man among friends should not mock another:
Many believe the man 
Who is not questioned to know much 
And so he escapes their scorn.

The wise guest has his way of dealing 
With those who taunt him at table:
He smiles through the meal, 
not seeming to hear 
The twaddle talked by his foes.

The fastest friends may fall out 
When they sit at the banquet-board:
It is, and shall be, a shameful thing 
When guest quarrels with guest.

An early meal a man should take 
Before he visits friends, 
Lest, when he gets there, 
he go hungry, 
Afraid to ask for food.

To a false friend the footpath winds 
Though his house be on the highway.
To a sure friend there is a short cut, 
Though he live a long way off. 

The tactful guest will take his leave Early, 
not linger long:
He starts to stink who outstays his welcome 
In a hall that is not his own. 

A small hut of one's own is better, 
A man is his master at home:
A couple of goats and a corded roof
Still are better than begging. 

A small hut of one's own is better, 
A man is his master at home:
His heart bleeds in the beggar who must 
Ask at each meal for meat. 

A wayfarer should not walk unarmed, 
But have his weapons to hand:
He knows not when he may need a spear,
Or what menace meet on the road. 

No man is so generous he will jib at accepting 
A gift in return for a gift, 
No man so rich that it really gives him 
Pain to be repaid. 

Once he has won wealth enough, 
A man should not crave for more:
What he saves for friends, foes may take;
Hopes are often liars. 

With presents friends should please each other,
With a shield or a costly coat:
Mutual giving makes for friendship
So long as life goes well.

A man should be loyal through life to friends,
And return gift for gift, 
Laugh when they laugh, 
but with lies repay
A false foe who lies. 

A man should be loyal through life to friends,
To them and to friends of theirs, 
But never shall a man make offer 
Of friendship to his foes. 

If you find a friend you fully trust 
And wish for his good-will, 
exchange thoughts, 
exchange gifts, 
Go often to his house. 

If you deal with another you don't trust 
But wish for his good-will, 
Be fair in speech but false in thought 
And give him lie for lie. 

Even with one you ill-trust 
And doubt what he means to do, 
False words with fair smiles 
May get you the gift you desire. 

Young and alone on a long road,
Once I lost my way:
Rich I felt when I found a another;
Man rejoices in man.

The generous and bold have the best lives, 
Are seldom beset by cares, 
But the base man sees bogies everywhere
And the miser pines for presents. 

Two wooden stakes stood on the plain,
on them I hung my clothes:
Draped in linen, they looked well born,
But, naked, I was a nobody.

The young fir that falls and rots 
Having neither needles nor bark, 
So is the fate of the friendless man:
Why should he live long?

Hotter than fire among false hearts burns 
Friendship for five days, 
But suddenly slackens when the sixth dawns:
Feeble their friendship then. 

A kind word need not cost much,
The price of praise can be cheap:
With half a loaf and an empty cup
I found myself a friend.

Little a sand-grain, little a dew drop, 
Little the minds of men:
All men are not equal in wisdom, 
The half-wise are everywhere. 

It is best for man to be middle-wise, 
Not over cunning and clever:
The learned man whose lore is deep 
Is seldom happy at heart. 

It is best for man to be middle-wise,
Not over cunning and clever:
The fairest life is led by those 
Who are deft at all they do.

It is best for man to be middle-wise, 
Not over cunning and clever:
No man is able to know his future, 
So let him sleep in peace. 

Brand Kindles Till they broun out,
Flame is quickened by flame:
One man from another is known by his speech
The simpleton by his silence.

Early shall he rise who has designs 
On anothers land or life:
His prey escapes the prone wolf, 
The sleeper is seldom victorious. 

Early shall he rise who rules few servants, 
And set to work at once:
Much is lost by the late sleeper, 
Wealth is won by the swift. 

A man should know how many logs 
And strips of bark from the birch 
To stock in autumn, that he may have enough 
Wood for his winter fires. 

Washed and fed, 
one may fare to the Thing: 
Though one's clothes be the worse for Wear,
None need be ashamed of his shoes or hose,
Nor of the horse he owns, 
Although no thoroughbred. 

As the eagle who comes to the ocean shore, 
Sniffs and hangs her head, 
Dumfounded is he who finds at the Thing 
No supporters to plead his case. 

It is safe to tell a secret to one, 
Risky to tell it to two, 
To tell it to three is thoughtless folly, 
Everyone else will know. 

Moderate at council should a man be, 
Not brutal and over bearing:
Among the bold the bully will find 
Others as bold as he. 

Often words uttered to another 
Have reaped an ill harvest:

Too early to many homes I came,
Too late, it seemed, to some;
The ale was finished or else un-brewed.

The unpopular cannot please.

Some would invite me to visit their homes,
But none thought I Had eaten a whole joint,
Just before with a friend who had two.

These things are thought the best:
Fire, the sight of the sun, 
Good health with the gift to keep it, 
And a life that avoids vice. 

Not all sick men are utterly wretched:
Some are blessed with sons, 
Some with friends, 
some with riches, 
Some with worthy works. 

It is always better to be alive, 
The living can keep a cow.
Fire, I saw, warming a wealthy man, 
With a cold corpse at his door. 

The halt can manage a horse, 
the handless a flock, 
The deaf be a doughty fighter, 
To be blind is better than to burn on a pyre:
There is nothing the dead can do. 

A son is a blessing, though born late 
To a father no longer alive:
Stones would seldom stand by the highway 
If sons did not set them there. 

Two beat one, the tongue is head's bane,
Pockets of fur hide fists. 

He welcomes the night who has enough provisions 
Short are the sails of a ship, 
Dangerous the dark in autumn, 
The wind may veer within five days, 
And many times in a month. 

The half wit does not know that gold 
Makes apes of many men:
One is rich, one is poor
There is no blame in that. 

Cattle die, kindred die, 
Every man is mortal:
But the good name never dies 
Of one who has done well. 

Cattle die, kindred die, 
Every man is mortal:
But I know one thing that never dies, 
The glory of the great dead. 

Fields and flocks had Fitjung's sons, 
Who now carry begging bowls:
Wealth may vanish in the wink of an eye, 
Gold is the falsest of friends. 

In the fool who acquires cattle and lands, 
Or wins a woman's love,
His wisdom wanes with his waxing pride, 
He sinks from sense to conceit. 

Now is answered what you ask of the runes, 
Graven by the gods, 
Made by the All Father, 
Sent by the powerful sage:
lt. is best for man to remain silent. 

For these things give thanks at nightfall:
The day gone, a guttered torch, 
A sword tested, the troth of a maid, 
Ice crossed, ale drunk. 

Hew wood in wind-time, 
in fine weather sail, 
Tell in the night-time tales to house-girls,
For too many eyes are open by day:
From a ship expect speed, from a shield, cover, 
Keenness from a sword, 
but a kiss from a girl. 

Drink ale by the hearth, over ice glide, 
Buy a stained sword, buy a starving mare 
To fatten at home: and fatten the watch-dog. 

No man should trust a maiden's words, 
Nor what a woman speaks:
Spun on a wheel were women's hearts, 
In their breasts was implanted caprice. 

A snapping bow, a burning flame, 
A grinning wolf, a grunting boar, 
A raucous crow, a rootless tree,
A breaking wave, a boiling kettle,

A flying arrow, an ebbing tide, 
A coiled adder, the ice of a night, 
A bride's bed talk, a broad sword, 
A bear's play, a prince's children,

A witch's welcome, the wit of a slave, 
A sick calf, a corpse still fresh,

A brother's killer encountered upon 
The highway a house half-burned, 
A racing stallion who has wrenched a leg, 
Are never safe: let no man trust them. 

Trust not an acre early sown, 
Nor praise a son too soon:
Weather rules the acre, wit the son, 
Both are exposed to peril. 

To love a woman whose ways are false 
Is like sledding over slippery ice 
With unshod horses out of control, 
Badly trained two-year-olds, 
Or drifting rudderless on a rough sea, 
Or catching a reindeer with a crippled hand 
On a thawing hillside: think not to do it. 

Naked I may speak now for I know both:
Men are treacherous too 
Fairest we speak when falsest we think:
many a maid is deceived. 

Gallantly shall he speak and gifts bring
Who wishes for woman's love:
praise the features of the fair girl, 
Who courts well will conquer. 

Never reproach another for his love:
It happens often enough 
That beauty ensnares with desire the wise 
While the foolish remain unmoved. 

Never reproach the plight of another, 
For it happens to many men:
Strong desire may stupefy heroes, 
Dull the wits of the wise. 

The mind alone knows what is near the heart, 
Each is his own judge:
The worst sickness for a wise man 
Is to crave what he cannot enjoy. 

So I learned when I sat in the reeds, 
Hoping to have my desire:
Lovely was the flesh of that fair girl, 
But nothing I hoped for happened. 

I saw on a bed Billing's daughter, 
Sun white, asleep:
No greater delight I longed for then 
Than to lie in her lovely arms. 

Come Odhinn, after nightfall 
If you wish for a meeting with me:
All would be lost if anyone saw us 
And learned that we were lovers. 

Afire with longing; I left her then, 
Deceived by her soft words:

I thought my wooing had won the maid, 
That I would have my way. 

After nightfall I hurried back, 
But the warriors were all awake, 
Lights were burning, blazing torches:
So false proved the path. 

Towards daybreak back I came 
The guards were sound asleep:
I found then that the fair woman 
Had tied a dog to her bed. 

Many a girl when one gets to know her 
Proves to be fickle and false:
That treacherous maiden taught me a lesson, 
The crafty woman covered me with shame; 
That was all I got from her. 

Let a man with his guests be glad and merry, 
Modest a man should be; 
But talk well if he intends to be wise 
And expects praise from men:
Fimbul fambi is the fool called; 
Unable to open his mouth.

Fruitless my errand, had I been silent 
When I came to Suttung's courts:
With spirited words I spoke to my profit 
In the hall of the aged giant. 

Rati had gnawed a narrow passage, 
Chewed a channel through stone, 
A path around the roads of giants:
I was like to lose my head. 

Gunnlod sat me in the golden seat, 
Poured me precious mead:
Ill reward she had from me for that, 
For her proud and passionate heart, 
Her brooding foreboding spirit. 

What I won from her I have well used:
I have waxed in wisdom since I came back, 
bringing to Asgard Odrerir, 
the sacred draught. 

Hardly would I have come home alive 
From the garth of the grim troll, 
Had Gunnlod not helped me, the good woman, 
Who wrapped her arms around me. 

The following day the Frost Giants came, 
Walked into Har's hall To ask for Har's advice:
Had Bolverk they asked, come back to his friends, 
Or had he been slain by Suttung? 

Odhinn, they said, swore an oath on his ring:
Who from now on will trust him?
By fraud at the feast he befuddled Suttung 
And brought grief to Gunnlod. 

It is time to sing in the seat of the wise, 
Of what at Urd's Well I saw in silence, 
saw and thought on.
Long I listened to men 
Runes heard spoken, counsels revealed. 
At Har's hall, In Har's hall:
There I heard this. 

Loddfafnir, listen to my counsel:
You will fare well if you follow it, 
It will help you much if you heed it. 
Never rise at night unless you need to spy 
Or to ease yourself in the outhouse. 

Shun a woman, wise in magic, 
Her bed and her embraces:

If she cast a spell, you will care no longer 
To meet and speak with men, 
Desire no food, desire no pleasure, 
In sorrow fall asleep. 

Never seduce anothers wife, 
Never make her your mistress. 

If you must journey to mountains and firths, 
Take food and fodder with you. 

Never open your heart to an evil man
When fortune does not favour you:
From an evil man, if you make him your friend, 
You will get evil for good. 

I saw a warrior wounded fatally 
By the words of an evil woman 
Her cunning tongue caused his death, 
Though what she alleged was a lie. 

If you know a friend you can fully trust, 
Go often to his house 
Grass and brambles grow quickly
Upon the untrodden track. 

With a good man it is good to talk,
Make him your fast friend:
But waste no words on a witless oaf, 
Nor sit with a senseless ape. 

Cherish those near you, never be 
The first to break with a friend:
Care eats him who can no longer 
Open his heart to another. 

An evil man, if you make him your friend, 
Will give you evil for good:

A good man, if you make him your friend; 
Will praise you in every place. 

Affection is mutual when men can open 
All their heart to each other:
He whose words are always fair 
Is untrue and not to be trusted. 

Bandy no speech with a bad man:
Often the better is beaten 
In a word fight by the worse. 

Be not a cobbler nor a carver of shafts, 
Except it be for yourself:
If a shoe fit ill or a shaft be crooked; 
The maker gets curses and kicks. 

If aware that another is wicked, say so:
Make no truce or treaty with foes. 

Never share in the shamefully gotten, 
But allow yourself what is lawful. 

Never lift your eyes and look up in battle,
Lest the heroes enchant you,
who can change warriors 
Suddenly into hogs.

With a good woman, if you wish to enjoy 
Her words and her good will, 
Pledge her fairly and be faithful to it:
Enjoy the good you are given. 

Be not over wary, but wary enough, 
First, of the foaming ale, 
Second, of a woman wed to another, 
Third, of the tricks of thieves. 

Mock not the traveler met On the road, 
Nor maliciously laugh at the guest:

The sitters in the hall seldom know 
The kin of the new-comer:
The best man is marred by faults, 
The worst is not without worth. 

Never laugh at the old when they offer counsel, 
Often their words are wise:
From shriveled skin, from scraggy things 

That hand among the hides 
And move amid the guts, 
Clear words often come. 

Scoff not at guests nor to the gate chase them, 
But relieve the lonely and wretched.

Heavy the beam above the door;
Hang a horse-shoe On it 
Against ill-luck, lest it should suddenly 
Crash and crush your guests.

Medicines exist against many evils:
Earth against drunkenness, heather against worms 
Oak against costiveness, corn against sorcery, 
Spurred rye against rupture, runes against bales 
The moon against feuds, fire against sickness, 
Earth makes harmless the floods.

Wounded I hung on a wind-swept gallows 
For nine long nights, 
Pierced by a spear, pledged to Odhinn, 
Offered, myself to myself 
The wisest know not from whence spring 
The roots of that ancient rood.

They gave me no bread, 
They gave me no mead,
I looked down;
with a loud cry 
I took up runes; 
from that tree I fell. 

Nine lays of power 
I learned from the famous Bolthor, Bestla's father:
He poured me a draught of precious mead, 
Mixed with magic Odrerir.

Waxed and throve well;
Word from word gave words to me, 
Deed from deed gave deeds to me.

Runes you will find, and readable staves, 
Very strong staves, 
Very stout staves, 
Staves that Bolthor stained, 
Made by mighty powers, 
Graven by the prophetic god.

For the gods by Odhinn, for the elves by Dain, 
By Dvalin, too, for the dwarves, 
By Asvid for the hateful giants, 
And some I carved myself:
Thund, before man was made, scratched them, 
Who rose first, fell thereafter.

Know how to cut them, know how to read them, 
Know how to stain them, know how to prove them, 
Know how to evoke them, know how to score them,
Know how to send them; know how to send them. 

Better not to ask than to over-pledge 
As a gift that demands a gift; 
Better not to send than to slay too many. 

The first charm I know is unknown to rulers 
Or any of human kind;
Help it is named, 
for help it can give In hours of sorrow and anguish. 

the sons of men 
Must learn who wish to be leeches. 

in the thick of battle, 
If my need be great enough, 
It will blunt the edges of enemy swords, 
Their weapons will make no wounds. 

it will free me quickly 
If foes should bind me fast 
With strong chains, a chant that makes Fetters spring from the feet, 
Bonds burst from the hands. 

no flying arrow, 
Aimed to bring harm to men, 
Flies too fast for my fingers to catch it 
And hold it in mid-air. 

it will save me if a man 
Cut runes on a sapling's Roots 
With intent to harm; it turns the spell;
The hater is harmed, not me. 

If I see the hall 
Ablaze around my bench mates, 
Though hot the flames, they shall feel nothing, 
If I choose to chant the spell. 

that all are glad of, 
Most useful to men:
If hate fester in the heart of a warrior, 
It will soon calm and cure him. 

when need I have 
To shelter my ship on the flood, 
The wind it calms, the waves it smoothes 
And puts the sea to sleep. 

if troublesome ghosts 
Ride the rafters aloft, 
I can work it so they wander astray, 
Unable to find their forms, 
Unable to find their homes.

when I lead to battle Old comrades in-arms, 
I have only to chant it behind my shield, 
And unwounded they go to war, 
Unwounded they come from war, 
Unscathed wherever they are.

If a tree bear 
A man hanged in a halter, 
I can carve and stain strong runes 
That will cause the corpse to speak, 
Reply to whatever I ask.

if I throw a cup Of water over a warrior,
He shall not fall in the fiercest battle,
Nor sink beneath the sword. 

If I tell a troop of warriors 
About the high ones, elves and gods, 
I can name them one by one.
Few can the nit-wit name. 

that first Thjodrerir 
Sang before Delling's doors, 
Giving power to gods, prowess to elves, 
Fore-sight to Hroptatyr Odhinn. 

if I see a girl 
With whom it would please me to play, 
I can turn her thoughts, can touch the heart 
Of any white armed woman. 

if I sing it, 
the young Girl will be slow to forsake me. 

To learn to sing them, Loddfafnir, 
Will take you a long time, 
Though helpful they are if you understand them, 
Useful if you use them, 
Needful if you need them. 

I know an eighteenth that I never tell 
To maiden or wife of man, 
A secret I hide from all 
Except the love who lies in my arms, 
Or else my own sister. 

The Wise One has spoken words in the hall, 
Needful for men to know, 
Unneedful for trolls to know: 
Hail to the speaker, 
Hail to the knower,
Joy to him who has understood, 
Delight to those who have listened.